hundreds of people have gathered at a
mosque in dohaqatar for a funeral
service for the slay Hamas leader Ismael
hania and his bodyguard multiple
officials and religious leaders are
attending the funeral hania had lived in
Qatar for many years and will be buried
there he was assassinated in what Iran
says was a missile strike inside Iran on
Wednesday speculation is now rif about
who could succeed him as leader of
hamas's political wing
H whoever replaces isma hania as hamas's
new political leader has to decide on
how the militant group will continue its
fight with Israel and also represent
Hamas on the world
stage the man accused of orchestrating
the October 7th Terror attacks on Israel
yashia sinir is considered more radical
than hania but senoir is believed to be
hiding in the group's tunnel Network
beneath the Gaza Strip
and he's expected to remain the chief of
Hamas in
Gaza experts believe a more likely
Contender to replace hania to be this
man khed mishal a veteran Hamas official
he was previously the leader of hamas's
political office directing the group
from Exile in 1996 he survived an
Israeli assassination attempt in Jordan
michall is considered more moderate and
he has good ties with Qatar and turkey
but his relations with Syria Iran and
Hezbollah soured over his support for
the 2011 Arab Spring
protests another possible choice to
replace hania is Khalil Alaya a senior
Hamas leader who also lives in Exile he
was the target of an Israeli
assassination attempt in
2007 ala is viewed as a powerful figure
within Hamas who was close to hania
after hania's death Alaya vowed to make
Israel pay a heavy
price while Hamas has a record of moving
quickly to replace assassinated Leaders
The Selection process this time will be
more challenging many members of the
group's main consultative body the shur
Council are in Gaza so a full leadership
meeting is
unlikely we joining me here in the
studio now is Daniel gerlock he's a
Middle East expert and the
editor-in-chief of zenith magazine
Daniel it's good to see you again we've
talked many many times about Hamas so
let me ask you who do you think is the
most likely successor to
I think the before mentioned
KH could be an interesting Contender um
he has been involved in the negotiations
he enjoys rather good ties with Qatar
but also with other Arab states um the
other uh person that was mentioned KH
Mash of course is a veteran he had been
uh at the head of Hamas for about 20
years I believe uh there was an
assassination attempt against him by the
Mad in Jordan in
1997 and uh the jordanians at that time
arrested the Israeli mad agents and they
said we will release them in exchange
for the antivenom so the Israelis
delivered that and my to my knowledge
it's never become 100% clear there was a
deal that the Israeli government would
not attempt another strike on Khaled
mashal again but I don't think if these
arrangements are are any longer valid
Khaled mhad was also chairing Hamas at
the time when there was a huge Fallout
between Hamas and Iran and Syria uh in
the in light of the Arab Spring and
hamas's uh involvement with the Muslim
brothers and with some of the
Revolutionary forces in the Middle East
but these are of course like twoo
interesting to be honest I don't want to
sound cynical but I think it's the most
covered job at the moment most coveted
job it's not the most it's not the most
coveted job yes what do it what does all
of this mean for the future of Hamas in
Gaza I mean how do you think Hamas is
going to react moving forward at the
moment and I think analysts tend to
overlook that um Hamas in Gaza is one
thing um but there is Hamas ideology and
there's also support and the aspirations
of Palestinians and uh in in in the West
Bank and that is a powder CAG people in
the West Bank are not necessarily Pro
Hamas but they in the last couple of
months have seen due to the failure of
the Palestinian Authority and due to the
uh constant let's say oppression and
increase of violence that Hamas is the
only force that somehow is fighting for
their cause of course that's somehow
somehow a suicidal mindset but in a way
uh as long as the war is going on Hamas
ideology is going to be there now the
question is we we saw the funeral
uh images of the funeral of ish in Doha
the
qataris to my knowledge were ready to
expel Hamas from Doha in the framework
of a deal but a deal that would have
included releasing the hostages and
exactly and ceasefire enter war in Gaza
um that's not I cannot you know they
never confirmed it to me but that's what
I what I heard in Doha the only problem
is of course if on the other side they
see that Israel is is is eliminating a
fascinating every negotiator involved I
mean also the other people that we hear
about here for example of course has
been targeted then it's fairly difficult
and now I think the qataris may change
their mind and say like look we don't we
don't we we were ready but you don't
force us into any decision for sure
Israel did not attack him in Doha that
is an important thing and that was also
part of a let's say a deal that the
qataris had to my knowledge with Israel
and with the Americans and Israel had
vowed since October 7th yeah to kill him
sure so this this wasn't a change in
policy no it wasn't a change he was one
of the main negotiators right he was the
point man for the the hostage it was it
wasn't changed in policy and uh for sure
not I mean they they made it abundantly
clear that every Hamas uh polit buau
political Wing military whatever is a
legitimate Target and beyond that I mean
about 40,000 people have died uh in the
war in Gaza so far so the question is of
course um and that's what many Israeli
analysts but also newspapers and and and
and demonstrators on the on the street
are asking are you at all interested
Benin Nano in the release of the
hostages because if at one point you you
you kill all the negotiators that can
speak on behalf of Hamas and
apparently like make this ceasefire
Impossible by by of course like
sabotaging the negotiations how do you
want us to release the hostages and that
is a a a a big problem in these so do
you think so do you think the prospects
of of releasing the hostages the
prospects of ceasefire are both of those
prospects now dead I mean not dead but
you hear uh what President Biden said I
mean you know he's usually not very
outspoken when he criticizes the Israel
government he said like the
assassination of is Han was not helpful
I mean you know measured by Biden's own
standards that's quite a statement um of
course there is huge frustration on the
other hand what happened in tan is of
course could bring the the the region to
the brink of of Another War but on the
other hand what we heard in the last 24
hours could also say like to point
towards deescalation because now there's
news and I think that's false news but
political opportune news about uh a bomb
being being placed pled there right in
in ter what's that what does that mean
that means there was a there was a
terrorist assassination in the uh views
of the Islamic Republic but there was no
violation of Iranian airspace no attack
on Iran from an outside country so if
that news I don't think it can be
substantiated but it's a political
opportune towards the escalation because
it allows some sort of a face saving
moderated reaction on the Iranian side
jiel as always it's good to have you
here in the studio good to get your
analysis thank you thanks for the
invitation let's pick up some of those
points with Ali fatah NAD who's from the
center for Middle Eastern Global Order
that's a think tank based here in Berlin
he's also order author of Iran in an
emerging New World Order from armag
jadad to ruhani welcome to
thew this so who is being talked about
as a successor to is aania as political
leader of Hamas
there I think at this point we don't
really know I mean um the names that you
mentioned in your report are part of the
discussions but um uh it's going to be
decided uh within Hamas um uh but this
also may not be the most important
factor here although it's you know the
top leaders are
important um it's uh not going to change
the Strategic direction of any of those
organizations uh while the uh targeted
assassinations of Israel against top
commanders of the so-called axis of
resistance May ins still
fear um the on the other hand they're
not going to uh do a away and uh uh you
know destroy um the so-called resistance
so it's more a kind of a network uh that
is at play here throughout the region in
the the Middle East so uh figures alone
are not the main story right that's
that's that's you make an interesting
point there so the Strategic uh the the
objective remains destroy Israel so
whoever is picked will just slot into
that framework and so how directly would
the is the Iranian leadership likely to
be involved in these discussions within
Hamas I think uh ham as opposed to
Hezbollah is a different story because
uh when you look at you know relations
between Iran and hezb those are much
more closer and they go back uh you know
since the start of the Iranian
Revolution and it's basically the uh
Iranians who uh uh you know uh created
esbah the Islamic revolu guard Corps uh
right after the Iranian uh the uh
Iranian Revolution in 1979 whereas also
what your report suggest that there have
been some tensions between Iran and
Hamas over the question of how to react
to the a spring arriving in Syria
whereas Iran was supporting uh the
Syrian dictator Bashar Al Assad there
was a kind of uh you know um
estrangement uh between Iran and Hamas
uh you know for quite some some time
back then so I believe that when it
comes to Hamas um Iran is not going uh
you know to be able to call the shots um
relatively speaking uh if if you compare
it for for instance if such a thing
would happen uh within Hezbollah but
then again also Hezbollah and also Hamas
those are organizations although they're
heavily supported by Iran uh they're
they have to be contextualized um
nationally is Hano was involved in ceasy
negotiations over Gaza what happens to
that process while Hamas blames Israel
for killing their Chief negot negotiator
and indeed while his successor is still
being
sought well for obvious reason uh this
process that has been under you know
ongoing in the capital of DOA has been
for now at least de facto torpedoed so
it is going to very much uh it's going
to be a difficult much more difficult
process Ahad it has been a very
difficult process up until now what we
heard uh more lately um is that uh you
know there have been uh quite a gulf
between the two sides between the Hamas
and the Israel side so um it doesn't
bode well uh of course for the
continuation of those attacks um to
achieve a ceasefire and also to free the
U Israeli
hostages um so this is um at least for
now a heavy blow uh to these
negotiations and and just that point
then do you think that the the the fact
that um if we presume that this was an
Israeli killing the the fact that it
that Israel went for this guy this uh
Senor Hamas leader effectively
torpedoing uh ceasefire and hostages uh
negotiations does that mean that Israel
has put destroying Hamas now above um
getting the hostages uh home alive
well it could well mean that but um
actually this may have been the case
already before uh because um you know it
is really questionable whether uh
Israel's military strategy uh that has
been announced from the very beginning
uh of the War uh has been adequate uh in
achieving the goal of freeing the
hostages as you know there is tremendous
debate uh within Israel uh whether you
know this kind of strategy that is
promoted uh very much by the Prime
Minister Netanyahu is going to lead to
some results and as we know um you know
there have been uh of course within this
kind of broad-based um you know
non-targeted manner of Israel's military
operations um uh probably they've been
you know hostages who already have been
killed uh in in this process so um you
know there is a lot of opposition also
to this kind of military strategy uh of
Israel by the families of the hostages
so this is quite a strong uh
contradiction uh that has been in play
uh well before the Hanah uh
assassination in tan fascinating
analysis and we thank you for it Ali
fella and N Jad from the center for
Middle East and Global order thank
you let's pick up some of those points
with Barbara slaven she's an expert on
Iran as well as being a distinguished
fellow at the Stimson Center in
Washington DC welcome to DW how do you
expect Iran and its proxies to avenge
Ismael hania's
killing well first of all thank you for
having me um I think it's pretty clear
there will be a strong
response uh when exactly and how exactly
not clear actually before coming on air
I was just looking at some rather
ominous posts on the social media site X
from some uh people close to the Iranian
government uh with pictures of missiles
going off um I would think there might
be some sort of coordinated response
rocket attacks drone attacks not just
from Iran but also from hezb in Lebanon
from the houis uh in Yemen who have
already fired on on Tel Aviv um it's a
very dangerous moment uh if if these
missiles are not intercepted if they
cause civilian casualties of course it
could lead to even more escalation on
the Israel side so it's it's one of the
tensest moments I think we've seen in
the last 10 months and do you expect a
direct response from Iran amongst that
rather than just leaving it to its
proxies yeah very much so uh we saw that
in April when the Israelis killed seven
Iranian military officers in a
diplomatic compound in Damascus uh this
strike uh whether it was a bomb that had
been planted or something that came from
from the air there are conflicting
reports uh hit Ismael hania in a very
wellu guarded supposedly compound in
Teran a place that's used for VIPs for
dignitaries visiting Iran so it was it
was quite flagrant and a real violation
of Iranian sovereignty we've also seen
the supreme leader of Iran Ayatollah
hame threaten uh revenge for this quite
explicitly so we don't know if it's
coming tonight tomorrow or a week from
now but I think it's definitely coming
okay so this um this killing of hania if
it was Israel um you you've described it
as a violation of Iranian sovereignty uh
same words that were used in in that
April um attack on um Iranian Sovereign
uh territory and what was said then and
what was said now is people were talking
about
the Iranian response being calibrated um
big enough to prove a point but not so
big that the whole region Goes Up in
Flames now you seem to be talking about
a strong coordinated response this seems
to be that sounds like more than we saw
in
April yeah it's possible the the April
attacks were telegraphed in
advance uh many Israel and the United
States for example had advanced warning
that they were coming
uh and were able to coordinate a
response along with other countries in
the region uh there may not be as much
warning this time uh the US is already
moving some Naval assets other assets
around in the Middle East to be in a
position to help the Israelis shoot down
rockets and missiles if that's indeed
what what is going to happen um I think
given the fact that it was in tran and
also that it was on the day of the
inauguration of the new Iranian
president that uh the regime in Iran has
to respond strongly and uh more strongly
than it did in April okay you you talked
about the the the us moving its ships in
the in the region around we've heard
from US President Biden saying that
Han's killing doesn't help the Gaza
ceasefire talks we've had countless
visits by the US Secretary of State and
I wonder is it fair to say that US
influence on any of the parties in this
conflict appears at the moment to be
minimal
well clearly US influence over BB
Netanyahu is not what we would hope it
would be he has shown uh complete
disregard for the views of the United
States He seems determined to continue
this war to expand this War uh he does
not seem interested in getting a
ceasefire in Gaza uh we have to remember
that uh if he stops the war there may be
a move to uh bring him down in Israel
and he faces charges for corruption so
he has personal and political as well as
ideological reasons for prolonging the
conflict uh just yesterday apparently
Joe Biden spoke again with nanyo uh and
said the United States was very
concerned not just about the strike that
killed hania but also a strike in the
southern suburbs of Beirut that killed a
senior Hezbollah leader just a few hours
prior to that these are very provocative
steps and they they seemed uh they seem
aimed at widening the war not at
containing it so it's it's a very moment
United States is not happy about this
okay uh thank you for guiding us through
that so clearly I appreciate that a lot
of this is is speculation but
interesting nonetheless uh Barbara
slaven from the Stimson Center in
Washington thank you so
much sure thank you